---
source: How To Get What You Want / KOBAKANT DIY
title: "Xbee"
url: "https://www.kobakant.at/DIY/?p=1215"
postId: 1215
date: "2009-06-23T17:34:44"
modified: "2009-07-02T10:39:41"
slug: "xbee"
imported: "2026-05-16 10:16"
---

<!-- pbs-source:htgwyw -->
#pbs/source/htgwyw

# Xbee

Source: https://www.kobakant.at/DIY/?p=1215

## Excerpt

Xbee is a wireless communication device from digi.com that uses ZigBee protocol. “ZigBee is a specification for a suite of high level communication protocols using small, low-power digital radios based on the IEEE 802.15.4-2003 standard for wireless personal area networks (WPANs), such as wireless headphones connecting with cell phones via short-range radio. The technology defined by the ZigBee specification is intended to be simpler and less expensive than other WPANs, such […]

## Content

Xbee is a wireless communication device from  digi.com that uses ZigBee protocol. “ZigBee is a  specification for a suite of high level communication protocols using small, low-power  digital radios based on the  IEEE 802.15.4-2003  standard for  wireless personal area networks (WPANs), such as wireless headphones connecting with cell phones via short-range radio. The technology defined by the  ZigBee specification is intended to be simpler and less expensive than other  WPANs, such as  Bluetooth. ZigBee is targeted at  radio-frequency (RF) applications that require a low data rate, long battery life, and secure networking.” (from wikipedia)

 

It operates with 3.3V and uses 50mA (series 1). Some Xbee ‘s pins can be set as Analog Input, Digital Input, Digital Output, or Analog Output (PWM). The numbers of pins are up to seven channels of analog input, nine channels of digital I/O and two channels of PWM. This means you do not need microcontroller to send sensor input to your computer. This example need two Xbee  Series 1 802.15.4 with firmware version 10A1 or later (I used 10A5), or two Xbee Seriese 2 with  ZNET 2.5 CORDINATOR API and  ZNET 2.5 ROUTER/END DEVICE API firmware. The following setup is  how to do Sensor-Xbee-Comp connection with Xbee  Series 1 802.15.4.

Pin configuration of Xbee  Series 1 802.15.4 and Xbee pro. The table is taken from  Xbee manual
