# Anastassia Pistofidou

Different independent educational programs will continue popping up until it is very dispersed.

## Q1: 

Fabricademy 是一個由不同實驗室組成的網絡計劃，旨在於教育和訓練有裝備的實驗室，例如Fablabs、Maker Spaces 和大學。這個計劃始於 2016 年，當時我已經在紡織和數字製造領域工作，並在世界各地舉辦了許多關於不同技術和不同方法的工作坊，以及更具創新性的實驗室活動。之後，越來越多的人對這個主題感興趣，於是我和來自Fablab網絡的兩位同事決定開展一個教育計劃。因此，Fabricademy 的服務是教育。當然，還有社群、機會、合作和協同效應，但這些是自然發生的額外事情，讓這個計劃繼續運作和發展的是教育服務。我們將其建立在已經存在的 Fablab 設施上。他們已經提供了「如何製作幾乎任何東西」的教育—子學院計劃。因此，他們有一種非常特殊的工作方式，既線上學習，也在實驗室進行實踐操作，結合線上學習和實體制作的分散式方式。在這種情況下，我們採用了這種格式的基本元素，即所有實驗室每週都要連接起來，互相展示他們所做的事情，所有實驗室都要在Gitlab 上以開源方式記錄所有文檔，或者所有實驗室都要評估學生，因此我們基本上擁有我所謂的基礎設施，即這些對於Fablab來說是常見的資產，我們在此基礎上構建了計劃的內容。 Fabricademy 是一個課程，你可以參加不同的實驗室- Fablab、紡織實驗室、創新實驗室或其他實驗室，我們稱之為「節點 （nodes）」。實際上，在美國沒有太多這樣的節點。在拉丁美洲，一開始就有更多節點，但現在主要在歐洲和日本擴展。有些年份會有學生，有些年則沒有。今年只有幾個節點是活躍的。有不同類型的實驗室，例如 Fablab、紡織實驗室等等。這些實驗室是合作夥伴，甚至可以是大學。它們來自 Fablab 網絡。我們宣傳了這個課程，並進行了公開招募。許多實驗室想要加入，因為他們想要獲得培訓內容，以便日後在自己的地區進行創新。所以，從第一年開始，我們就有了 13 個實驗室。每年我們都會對實驗室進行公開招募。但是，即使您申請成為該網絡的一部分，您仍需要滿足一些最低要求才能進行課程，這些要求是您至少需要擁有工具和機器，以便每週開設課程。我們幫助許多實驗室購買和建設基礎設施。通常，實驗室有自己的資金，然後他們來找我們，說： 「我們想實施紡織學院，我們需要什麼？」但是這些實驗室都有自己的資金。我們並不會獲得越來越多的實驗室，只會有幾個，因為開設課程是很困難的，需要很高的要求。我們有一些實驗室比較穩定，還有一些新的實驗室，他們有資金，說：「我有資金，我今年想和你合作，使用一部分資金來進行培訓。」但是你必須成為一個提供教育的場所，因為從商業角度來看，Fabricademy 的 「產品」是教育。如果你像一個黑客空間，從來沒有做過研討會，而你想提供六個月的密集培訓，那麼這將更加困難，因為人們不認識你。因此，理解每個利益相關者和合作夥伴的身份是很重要的，因為如果你是一所只提供免費教育的大學，那麼突然提供一個 價值6,000 美元的課程就很困難了。沒有人會為此支付，因為大家都知道你是一所免費的大學。但是，在這種情況下，你可以申請註冊，獲得政府資金支持這個計劃，然後免費向學生提供課程，這是教育計劃中經常發生的事情。因此，有很多因素決定你提供的服務是什麼，每個成員的身份又是什麼。

## Q2: Can you brief us about what Fabricademy is and what was the motivation for you to build it?

Fabricademy is a project that happens in a networked way with different laboratories. It is about education and training in the context of laboratories that have equipment, like Fablabs, maker spaces, universities.It started in 2016. I was already in the textile and digital fabrication field and I was giving a lot of workshops all over the world about different techniques and about different methodologies, and more innovative things that could happen in the lab. And then there were more people that were interested in this topic. So there was a moment when I and two of my colleagues from the Fablab network decided to make another program, which would be an educational program.So the offer of the Fabricademy is education, that’s the service. Of course, there is also the community, the opportunities, the collaborations, the synergies, but these are extra things that happen in a natural way, and the one that makes the project continue to work and allows us to work and further develop it is the service of education.And then we are basing it on an already existing setup which is the Fablab. They already offer education, how to make almost anything - the sub Academy program. So they have a very specific way of working which is both online and practical hands-on in the laboratories, combining the online learning with the physical making in a distributed way. In this case we took the basic elements of this format, which is that all the labs connect weekly and show each other what they’ve done, all the labs document everything in an open source way on Gitlab, or all the lab evaluate the students, so we basically have what I call infrastructure, I mean these kinds of assets that are common for the Fablabs, and on that we built upon the content of the program. Fabricademy is a program, then you have different labs - Fablabs or textile labs or innovation labs or their different labs and Fablab, that you can participate in. We call them nodes.There are not so many of these nodes in the US actually. We had more in the beginning in Latin America. But actually it is mainly expanding in Europe and locally, now we also have it in Japan. Some years they have students and some years they don’t. This year only a few of them are active. There are different types of labs, there is the Fablab, there is the textile lab... so these labs are partners, and they can even be universities. They are from the Fablab network. We promoted the program and we made an open call. Maybe many laboratories wanted to join because they wanted to get the training content so that they can innovate later in their location. So already from the first year we had 13 labs. Every year we make an open call for labs. But even if you apply to become part of this network, you need to fulfill some minimal requirements to be able to do the program, and these requirements are that you at least have the tools and the machines to be able to run the courses each week. And we help many labs to buy and to make the infrastructure. Normally the labs have their own funds and then they come and they say, ‘we want to implement the textile Academy, what do we need?’ But the labs have the fund themselves. We don’t get more and more labs, we just get a few because it is difficult to run the program. It’s very demanding. We have some labs that are more stable and then a few new ones that many times have a fund and they say, ‘I have a fund, I will work with you this year, use some part of the fund to get the training.’ But you need to be somehow a place that offers education because the service of Fabricademy, the ‘product’ if you see it from the business side, is education. And if you are like a hacker space that never did workshops before and you want to offer a six months training intensively, then it will be more difficult because people do not not know you. So it is a matter of understanding what is the identity of each stakeholder, of each partner, because if you are a university that offers only free education, then it is very difficult for you to suddenly offer a program that costs 6,000 dollars. Nobody will pay for it because everybody knows that you are a university that is free. But if you want in this case you apply to register and get the governmental fund for this program and then you offer it for free to the students, which is what happens with the educational programs. So there are many factors of what is the service that you offer and what is the identity of each member.

## Q3: What is the difference between your education system or your service from the university or the conventional art science education?

Imagine that nowadays we see that the education inside the universities, the format and the models are getting very outdated. And also due to Covid, universities had to try to find ways of creating online education. And imagine that this inside the Fablab network is already 12 years old. Before the existence of broadcasting applications, the Fablab network already had its own SSH, its own Zoom or Jitsi in a very low quality ten years ago, and you were able to learn from the inventor of the Fablabs that is inside MIT and you are in India. And this is the concept. Basically, the whole educational model of ‘where do we learn from’ is going to radically change. And imagine that Covid made it so that even children stay at home and they learn from the national TV, they get classes like that now. And we have been doing this since a long time ago, so we have developed a lot of assets, infrastructures and tools to support it. For example, we have our chat platform for the students, it is open source. It is on Git, it is like Slack but open source. It’s very similar to what we use in the e-textile summer camp which is called Riot or Element. It’s like a chat but through it you can also see the events and opportunities. So every day I send the Alumni and the current students open calls, artistic residencies, positions for Phds, working opportunities, conferences, symposium, festivals, I send them a lot of opportunities through it. And then in the platform you have the instructors which are the local experts that teach the program. Then we have each class, and then each one has their own lab, and then I can have direct messages, and you can also find out what happens every week, so it is a user friendly platform that combines learning and the social aspect, it’s not like these platforms that they have in the universities that are like, ‘your grade was this’. There is also another thing that we do. We have self-evaluation. So we tell the participants that they are not students. They are there because they want to be there, and nobody put them there, so if they don’t want to do anything, it’s their own loss of time and money and they have to self-evaluate themselves. And then the other thing is that we do not actually evaluate anyone from the way they perform but only from how they document. So it is as though if you didn’t document it, you didn’t do it. And everything stays there documented like a personal diary, but also like a reinformation for the next year. I think that the most radical thing that is different from the current educational model is to be able to have live updates on the contents due to the fact that you’ve documented everything. Every year you will not start from scratch, you will build upon what the last people did. And this is kind of nice because in the school you have to search for your references. They will tell you some links and things like that, but you will not be able to have a database that you will be able to learn from. And the other thing is that all of this information is open, so if you want to read it on your own and do the program on your own, you can do it. It’s all free. But if you want to go to the training and get feedback, and to get to know the community, and you get to learn all of these things, then you want to go to the lab and also get the physical training.

## Q4: Since Fabricademy is a global platform, can you tell us some impacts or values from being this global?

The thing is that we need to find more places that offer education. So we need to find some type of university or open university, places that already offer education, and then tell them the benefits of this program to become part of the community. A challenge is that many labs, or many nodes are unofficial, or more for hobbies, or for short weekend workshops and they do not offer long term education, and then they really struggle to make the program, to run the program to find students, because nobody understands this new type of education. It’s not a university. So at the moment it is not very sustainable but we hope that it will become more stable, let’s say. This is not mainstream yet, but it will happen very soon. We need some more time to see that many different independent educational programs will pop up and will continue popping up until education is very dispersed, and then you can really make your own path. But this also needs to happen at a more governmental level. I mean in France they already give scholarships for Fabricademy because they want this informal - they call it vocational education, and they already support this kind of initiatives, but not everywhere in the world yet. Every week you will see that according to the topic, you will have a lot of cultural content that comes from… the heritage comes from the culture and it manifests in what everyone does. So there is this exchange. For example, now we do this class of natural dyes, and because of Fabricademy I know now what are the native plants in Brazil. Because when they present, we tell them to look in their history and to find local things that they have. So it is super rich culturally. And I think that the fact that you are part of a bigger community and you are not alone is very important, because it is very specific what we are doing as the textile digital fabrication, biotechnology, and the e-textile, so it is the same when you find, for example, similar colleagues in the e-textile summer camp, you feel that there is a community and that you are not alone, and at the end of the day if you see the textile community, you know more or less all the people. So when you put them together and you connect them, it is a nice thing because then you can have collaborations, learn from each other, have synergies, and that’s about it I think. But at the same time, each lab, each location has their own identity, and they can do and orient the content to apply, because technology is broad, where you apply is the specific thing. For example, in Germany, we have a lab that only applies the program to Assistive Technologies. And they take an identity. They develop their identity. If you want to all be about circularity and natural sustainable solutions, you can work on that part and you can develop your identity. And that’s also the nice part because each one is different and then they can share with each other and bring all of this diversity inside.

## Q5: Can you tell us a bit about the financial state of Fabricademy?

a fund to be able to do the program. I’m not saying that we couldn’t also find some funds globally. I’m saying that we didn’t have time to work on the global level of how to be able to support the program. The values that we have is that basically everything needs to be documented and shared. We are building upon the knowledge of the previous generation, so everything is documented and open source. The new is always evolutionary, it evolves because the students from the previous year can see and they can learn, and it’s kind of like a continuation of what has been done before. Of course I can’t tell you that it is a profitable business at the moment, but it can make enough money for it to survive, and it can give us at least something to continue working on it. I cannot work on it full time, it doesn’t give me a full-time salary, but it can give me a part-time salary. It can give the three of us a salary, from the student fees. So afterwards we have the labs and each lab is actually trying to find funds for being able to offer the program in their location. Fabricademy as an entity in the global network cannot really provide any scholarships. We don’t have partners that give us money for scholarships. But each lab can present Fabricademy for the local sponsors, or local unemployment funds, or local like gender equality things and then the lab can obtain Now, the program of Fabricademy has a specific cost that we define acording to how much we think that education costs in the world nowadays, and this cost sometimes is not accessible. It’s expensive. For six months you need to pay around 8000 dollars if you are in Europe and US and in Canada, and 6000 dollars if you are in South America or in Asia and other countries. And then one part of it pays the global instructors and the global tasks, and one part (around 65%) stays in the lab. So it is helping the labs to have some economical model and the more students they have, the less percentage they pay to the global fees, so let’s say that I have one student and for the global Fabricademy expenses I pay 3000 and my lab keeps 4000, but then when I have more students I pay less to the global and my lab can keep more. So that’s an incentive to have more students. And also it’s an incentive for the labs because at the end, for example, with five students, you get 20,000 in six months, which is a salary for an instructor and the materials and it’s enough to get the program running. Right now we have around five students per lab, and we have 10 labs, so in total 50 students.

## Q6: Why makes you to keep the program running since you are not gaining so much profit?

Because it gives you a lot of content and it gives you a lot of opportunities afterwards. So, basically, the labs stay afterwards with the students. They collaborate with the students and many times they hire them for new things. It’s kind of like a training that afterwards gives opportunities to the labs - they either are able to apply for new funds with the content they create, or connect the people and make opportunities for the students to work afterwards in the lab, and things like that.

## Q7: Do you think it is possible to initiate or to reinvent to trigger the collaboration between this community and other local Industries?

We tried this and we thought about this a lot, the industry… they want fast production, less cost and when you enter into innovation, it’s all like time loss, resource… for example, we asked them ‘do you want to train your employees?’ but they don’t want to lose time. So I don’t know how this could work, because if you want to work with industry, you need to offer a different product or service, not education. The whole thing now is the platform - how to make a platform? I mean if you want to go into this more systemic level, you should think more of a platform. So when we talk about a platform, for example, there is this platform called Make Works. It is a platform where you can find the local manufacturers and suppliers. And then you have another platform, which is a platform for talent, designers. You have a platform where you connect the makers and designers and you have different designers in the different fields. Then you have the platform of the labs - fablabs.io, this one is a platform where you can find all the labs of the world. Everyone can register their own Fablab. Then you have the S+T+ARTS platform, there you have a lot of opportunities, events, projects, and what they do. That one is cool for artists because it gathers all the opportunities there. There is also a platform called ‘JOGL: Just One Giant Lab’. So this one is doing biotech, they make DIY vaccines, COVID test DIYs, they have resources, it is amazing. So in general, if you want to put some kind of community together, you need to make a platform for this where people can learn from each other and share things and which can give them visibility. And then you can start talking with sponsors and industries because they will find this tool, which would be like Linkedin but it’s not Linkedin, more specific one. 我們經歷了一個學習過程，所以在第二屆徵選時發展出了一個科技藝術方法論和工具箱。
