# Stelio Manousakis

Luckily, the netherlands government doesn’t care about this commercial stuff because they have understood the notion of cultural capital.

## Q1: What is the current states of Modern Body Festival now?

We put a pause because we were also a bit burnt out because we were doing so much and it was just the two of us. So we had this amazing idea to not organize a biennial in 2020. And then the pandemic came and we were like patting ourselves on the back ‘how good of an idea was to not try to do this.’ We organized another event, a smaller scale event, as we had promised it. We have a different problem in our hands. The Netherlands is saturated, there is too much going on, so it’s hard to get audiences too excited, or to show up to the extent that we want them to or to the extent of the effort we’re putting in. And we’re also practicing art, so it has been good to not have to organize stuff for a while. I think we’re probably going to do something at some point, but we don’t have a plan coming too soon. Sustainability is a problem. Basically we were working for like a year and a half for the biennial and then the other half of the year we were wrapping it up and regaining our strength from not having slept for months at a time. So sustainability is a big thing, and also what you get from the effort that you put because does it make a difference? Or how much more can I do as an independent artist when I’m not spending all my time organizing? That is for me, at least personally, the biggest question at the moment. It is nice to organize things. I had a job recently where I was I was helping with the technical production of a festival, that has nothing to do with my work, and that was really nice, I like assisting people but my investment was much different and also I got paid like much better than I’m getting paid for our festival because for our festival we want to do all these other things, so we end up not getting paid well at all for it. So we had our first edition of Modern Body Festival in 2014 and it’s a festival that we called Intermedia. It’s not multimedia in that we don’t put different media together, but we’re trying to find the place where different media converts and come together as equals, kind of where they collide and to see what happens when this media collide. So we’ve had so far three big biennial editions: in 2014, 2016 and 2018. Each of them has a theme that we is very central to the programming that we do, we pick works and we pick the way that we present them to respond to this theme, and also the way that we make the festival is really important. We also had a sister edition of the festival in 2016 in Taipei in collaboration with this architecture platform, the festival was called Space Media Festival. And those were the three big biennials. As I said, in 2020, we decided to take a step back and not do that, and that was good because anyway we wouldn’t be able to do a biennial because of COVID. We’ve started a smaller series that’s called Modern Body Laboratory, which is more focused on local artists and its smaller scale. Events have lasted several days, but it is a more modest scale program, and we’ve done three of those and those can be anything, as part of the festival we’ve done symposium, exhibitions, performances, workshops, sometimes altogether, sometimes at different moments. So we are really interested in this kind of multiple outcomes and multiple types of processes. The festival itself is more centered on experience and completed works, at least for the works that we present, not the Symposium. The laboratories can be a little bit more open as to what happens. That’s the gist of it, and in terms of the outlook it has a lot to do with how we experience the world, we are interested in very embodied works that’s all actually, also something that we interestingly struggled a little bit with the last laboratory that we organized that was almost a year ago in November 2021, and the kinds of works that we like to program are often very intimate and very close up and personal. So with COVID we were for a long time wondering, ‘okay, we can’t do these things because it’s not safe for the transmission of this disease. We can’t put people face to face and do the things that we want to do. We can’t have a performance with many people congregating together, so that was an interesting side effect of being in this space with COVID.

## Q2: What makes Modern Body Festival so popular at the first place?

We had the major response through our open call. I don’t remember the numbers now, but we were really surprised. There was so much response that we were trying to download the responses and Google was blocking us because they thought there’s suddenly so much traffic on our Gmail account that we must be a bot. I think it’s due to the combination of the themes and the wording was very important I’m sure, because one thing we realized was that we had more women responding to our open call. You know new media is a very male dominated field in many regards, and that was like in 2016. And I think the wording was open, and the event is not a technology festival, we have a lot of things with technology, but we did not present it as ‘This is a technology festival where you’re going to get all kinds of male nerds that are behind their computer responding’, no, it was much more about the human condition in a way, and then we had much wider response from all kinds of people. So I think that was very important from what I’ve heard. Having a Website that looked nice and professional was also important, people saw it and they thought, ‘I want to be part of this.’ We didn’t have a call in the first edition. The first edition was basically in a shoestring budget, we had a tiny amount of money. It was all people we knew, and that were in our network. But all were really, really great artists, really great work, so I think that also helped. When we did the open call people could refer, they looked at the previous edition. They were like, ‘Oh, this looks really cool. I want to be part of it,’. And we made it clear we’re going to pay people. That’s also important because. As an artist I see many times that you have these open calls where they basically tell you ‘Oh, you’re going to have exposure or whatever’ and that happens at big festivals also. We are artists, so we hate the idea of not paying artists, we’ve always paid our artists for presenting work, and I think that’s also something that really helps get the word out. We didn’t promote it, our PR budget was minuscule, because our budgets were very small compared to other festivals. But we got a lot of responses, the call was being translated in other languages without us having to do anything.

## Q3: What impact do you feel the pandemic has had on the art world? I sense that many artists and event organizers are relatively less active, and after this impact, it seems that the art industry is no longer more influential than the entertainment industry.

I mean we are acting as the pandemic is over, but it’s not over in a way, we’ve just decided that it’s probably not a very serious threat anymore, so the borders are not very clear, and we for two years you couldn’t do anything in real life, so people got a bit unused to doing things we got unused to meeting people, so that’s one thing. I think, maybe people got a little bit more mainstream. Because they were sitting inside watching TV or Netflix, or whatever. And there is a kind of attack on normal people’s livelihoods, on our wallets, not just the artists, everyone. So with COVID big companies made a lot of money doing specific things, small shops closed because there was no way to sustain it. Big companies could afford to buy them out. And now we have the excuse of the war in Ukraine that ‘Hey everything is more expensive’ because blame Putin while you see that all kinds of energy companies have doubled their profits, there are some more structural things at play in our society, but I think we’re also in more uncertain times. In terms of ‘are we out? Are we in? Where is the world going?’ So it’s just a little bit of instability, but I think people are interested in the arts, and they will be interested. If I want to be optimistic, I’m sure we’ll bounce back, but the world is also going to a bad place, so we’ll see. I don’t know. But industry is part of the problem. So when I’m saying like the world is not going to a good place, there is a very practical thing. The planet is suffering because of the way we’re treating it, there is a climate crisis and a huge reason for this climate crisis is the industry, because the industry only cares about its shareholders, and this is the most important reason why we’re in this, because shareholders care about the short term profit. I would say that the more artists are tied to industry, the less value its message has, just in philosophical terms. So if we are tied to whichever industry, like if we’re working with E-textiles, we are tied to a big factory. What does this factory do to make the message of the art you make pass through? How does this help us? Because art ideally helps us learn things about ourselves. In the Netherlands, the money source is subsidies, the money is given by the government but is not handed out by the government, so you’re not tied to the government for the kind of art you are making, industry has very little to do with it and the public has some things to do with it. But you don’t need to make your living out of tickets because there is an understanding that art has a value that should be supported because it’s valuable for what it is. I understand this is not the case in other places, like in the U.S., for example, you have to approach the industry or you have to do something very commercial so you get a lot of people, or you have to go into the academia and have a university support your research, and then your university gets its money from the government, or from the industry, or from funders. So it is different in different places, even though we live in a fairly globalized society, so I don’t think there is a decision you can make for all places just because the source is different in all ways, but just philosophically that’s perhaps one of the reasons why I stay here, because I don’t have to go to an industry that destroys the planet, to ask them for money to make art that supports the opposite idea. That’s putting it in very binary terms, very like black and white terms. Of course, things are much more complex, but that’s always on my mind. I’m sure there are other types of industries also, there has to be, but then it’s a matter of finding them I guess. I think humans need art all the time. There is a matter of finding a source to make your art and finding a way to make it to pay your bills as a practitioner. Because inevitably, someone gets money to do art that is meaningless, or that’s just an advertisement for an industry, and then that’s the only art that exists, that’s an extreme example, but that is one possibility. But I think there is always space for art and there is always space for art that goes against the grain, for art that is helping the world move forward, or the art that is experimental and is open to figure out what it is that we want to do. I think in the world at large there is a push to turn us more conservative and more fascist globally you see that, but that’s also happening because I feel there is an inherent necessity of people, the more access we have to things we are also getting a bit more radical and open and free, so then there is a push, ‘Oh, these people are getting more free’. I saw this in Greece. Maybe you know that there was a neo-nazi party in the government in Greece, now they’re behind bars thankfully. They were in the Parliament and it was really obvious to me living abroad how this came, there was a radicalization of society to the left of Greek society because of the austerity measures in 2008 to 2010. And then it was really obvious that piles of money were thrown at these Neo-nazis, promoting what they did to convince people not to go radical to the left, and to go radical to the Neo-nazis because they were getting old at that time and all these things. So you see it in the U.S. for example with Trump, you see it in Brazil, Bolsonaro just lost, you see it everywhere. There’s this extreme right which is funded by billionaires and industries. I mean it is a Hitler himself didn’t rise on his own. He was part of the German industrial complex. They supported him. They were like ‘This is the guy who’s going to put our interest forward. And if he kills six million Jews in the way, whatever, we’re going to be rich in the meantime.’ So I think there’s always the need for the stuff to go back. There’s always lots of people who are interested in art, that is independent in art, that is avant-garde and experimental, but then it’s harder to find the money. I don’t have an answer, I don’t live a rich life. Again, what we do is worth at least as much as what other people do and get paid for. So I think you know, we should try and get paid for it as much as that’s possible because this work deserves it. Art is not an afterthought. It’s really important for how we understand the world. It’s really important for how we manage to survive in a world that is depressing in many other ways. In some ways, it works as a simulation of things in a safe space because you can experiment. And no one is going to die, you can present a different paradigm, and that applies to all kinds of arts, you read a book, and then you’re immersed in this world that doesn’t exist in reality, it’s a figment of your imagination, but you can live within it if it’s a good book, and then it shows you ‘Hey, this is a way to develop empathy with a different character, or to become part of a different society or a different way of living without actually being there.’ But then this has repercussions in how you leave your world when you come back to normal life. So I think it is fundamental to us as a species, so we should demand that it is treated as us.

## Q4: About sustainability, how do you deal with the nonprofit and profitable part in your organizing jobs?

What is for profit and what is nonprofit? I’m not sure how you perceive it, but I do know that in our art world, depending on the context, it can feel wrong to be paid for your work. However, getting paid for your work as an artist is not for profit. We have the right to make art and be able to afford rent and buy groceries. This is not profit; getting by is not profit. When you create your art, build networks, or act as an organizer, your labor should be paid, and you can still be nonprofit. A nonprofit organization pays its employees; it does not consist solely of volunteers. You can still be nonprofit and make a living. Making a living is not a profit. Here in the Netherlands, it’s pretty self-evident that people need to work and get paid. In Greece, I know places where art doesn’t pay, so it can feel strange to think, “Oh, I’m making art and getting paid; maybe that’s wrong.” But it’s not wrong. Nonprofit doesn’t mean that you have to undercut and undervalue your work because your work is important. Ideally, your work should pay you enough to continue doing it; otherwise, you’ll get burned out or be too busy with other things that matter less in the long run. When the Taiwanese government provides funding, it benefits them to have a vibrant, artistic scene because people are happier to live and visit there. Art has value, and we shouldn’t be afraid to support it, even within the context of mainstream society. Art is not something that happens on the side; it’s essential for humanity. If it wasn’t, we wouldn’t have it. Art has been a part of humanity for as long as we know, so it’s not something to be disregarded. It’s fundamental to being human. Let’s claim our worth and not be shy just because mainstream society values 9-to-5 jobs more. They don’t hold more value than us. There is a concept called cultural capital, which has value alongside financial capital. Within the capitalistic society context, you can ascribe a financial value to cultural capital. We don’t need to do that, but culture has value in the world, so we shouldn’t be too modest or afraid to claim that what we’re doing has value for society, even within the capitalistic context. Consider how much money the US invested during the Cold War to prove that they had the best, freest art scene, making them the leading civilization. That’s an example of investing in cultural capital, even within the context of making money and gaining power, which our world currently revolves around.

## Q5: What do we deal with the of power and hierarchy relationship in the collaborations with funding sources or other partners?

There is an inherent amount of power, let’s say, when you have the money to organize something. By default, you’re setting the agenda. However, I don’t find this fundamental if we want to do the same things, get along, and nobody is trying to impose their agenda on others. It’s a framework for working together. If you’re the one coming up with the money and bringing people to Taiwan to work on something, then you’re defining the agenda and framework. Still, I don’t see this as negative. Being invited as an artist to a residency with someone paying for you is really cool. It’s not necessarily a power relationship; it’s also a relationship of gratitude. I’m doing a short residency in Brussels soon, and they engage with each other through collaborative principles that I find very interesting. Racism, sexism, and other negative behaviors are unacceptable; there are rules of conduct. Establishing such guidelines can be helpful when building a community. You can show people how to work well together and quickly address any misbehavior. It’s simple, but also complex because as long as you work with people, you have to deal with relationships, and that’s just a fact of life. If you see recurring issues, you have to find a solution or prevent them from happening again. But meeting new people with different personalities will always bring surprises. People invest equally in something if they serve the vision equally or feel they have equal gains. If you approach someone else to organize something, it’s your vision, so you’ll likely have to put in most of the effort. Ideally, you find someone eager to do the same things and come in as equals in terms of vision and goals. It might not be easy to find that. Artists who can’t grow or create in different ways might have to go the commercial route. This is a problem in many places. In the Netherlands, we have state subsidies that support experimental art. We have the liberty to do this to a certain extent, but funds have their own preferences and requirements. In Greece, nobody cares about art, so there’s no way to engage any industry. I’m not 100% familiar with the context in Taipei, but I’m sure there are ways to find people who want to do things the way you want because you can’t be the only one on the island operating that way. It might be a matter of finding people abroad or Taiwanese people not tied to hierarchy. The goal is to have interesting conversations with peers, discussing your work in-depth, and not just talking about the surface. In the Netherlands, we are fortunate to have this experience.

## Q6: Public funding usually comes with some preexisting political tendencies. If you have to use these funds, how do you avoid

conflicts between the political stance of the subsidy and the artistic vision of the project? For example, if there is potential nationalist funding for a project discussing decolonization issues. The Netherlands is quite diverse, especially in the arts, as there are many international people involved. Discussing Dutch politics doesn’t make much sense, primarily because the Dutch generally don’t care about politics since they are relatively wealthy. When you’re wealthy, you may not want to question why too much, as you might discover things about yourself that you don’t like. Additionally, the international nature of the arts in the Netherlands means that we don’t all share the same concerns or issues. In Greece, the primary issue with Greek culture is the focus on ancient Greek culture, as most of the funding goes towards ancient artifacts and sites. This focus is deeply ingrained and often benefits conservative, right-wing politics. Every culture has similar issues to some extent. For example, in Austria, funding mainly goes towards classical music, leaving little space for unconventional contemporary compositions. Thus, a massive improvisation scene has emerged in response. Each culture has to deal with these issues to some extent, and finding strategies to escape them without entering a losing conversation is a valid question. Bringing people from abroad can make such questions irrelevant, as we’re not going to focus on specific local issues. Instead, we can discuss a broader range of topics. This approach could also help find more local support, as there are likely many people in Taiwan, for example, who are tired of focusing on certain issues and want to explore other things. When speaking with people from the same culture, it’s easy to know where you stand on certain matters, and small differences can be defining. However, when talking to someone from the other side of the world, there’s so much that you don’t share. You might have radically different political views, but those differences may not be immediately recognizable or even relevant since they don’t directly impact the specifics of your work. This dynamic is just another fact of life when working in diverse, international environments.

## Q7: In general, how do you handle the gaps in understanding between various disciplines at the Modern Body Festival when collaborating with professionals from different fields?

Bridging gaps in levels of understanding is a matter of trust and explaining things in a way that is accessible to someone’s knowledge, even if they have no idea what you’re talking about. It’s a two-way street: find a way to speak their language so they can understand what it is. We all struggle to explain what we do to people who don’t understand it, but it’s a skill that develops slowly. It’s a process. You can’t expect to meet the right people all the time, especially not in the beginning. Things happen slowly. People are talking about this idea of decolonization more, but it wasn’t spoken about that much 20 years ago. It takes people continuously talking about things for progress to occur. Take, for example, a curator who heard about decolonization from you for the first time. Maybe someone else will come in three years and talk about it, and they’ll read something, then there’s someone else, and eventually, they’ll get it. Your effort isn’t wasted; it’s just that the payoff is nonlinear, and you might only achieve a certain thing. Progress is slow, and you may need to be on the lookout for people with whom you can go beyond surface understanding and delve deeper into the things you want to talk about and question. There is development happening globally, and eventually, it will reach the periphery, like Taiwan and Greece. Once these ideas are talked about more and more, it becomes easier to discuss them without people being confused. It’s crucial to involve outsiders in these discussions, baffiing locals and bringing different perspectives. Otherwise, you’re stuck in a vicious circle talking about the same thing. When I was studying in Greece around 1999 or 2000, I discovered an electronic music center in the country. I was thrilled and began researching their activities. As I delved deeper, I learned that Greece had produced one of the most significant global composers in the field, Iannis Xenakis. However, I was disappointed to discover that the center’s major project was to reconstruct an ancient Greek water pipe or water organ, despite being an electronic music center. It seemed that this was the only project they could secure funding for. The experience made me realize that the country’s priorities weren’t aligned with mine, and I needed to find somewhere else to pursue my passion for music. Now, 20-something years later, things have improved, and progress is happening. It’s a process that takes time. If you’re introducing new ideas, people will absorb them. They might not credit you because they’ve subconsciously absorbed the information and think they came up with it. It’s a somewhat thankless path, but not entirely thankless. People know what you’re doing, and if you’re doing it long enough, they’ll understand that you’re always in the middle of these things. Being involved also means you have more chances of meeting like-minded people, making your life more enjoyable in this context. If you organize events, eventually someone with similar ideas will show up, and that’s good for you. use it as bait for people who don’t fully understand you, allowing you to discuss other topics and introduce them to new ideas. Living in the Netherlands, I have the freedom to do things in a certain way because the context and place allow me to do so. However, I don’t experience the satisfaction of investing in my people, as I’ve lived here for 15 years already, and they’re not my people and never will be. It is my community, but it would be much different if I were doing this in Greece, where it would be more painful. However, there would be a significant payoff when you see progress and know you’ve contributed to it. That’s something to keep in mind for yourself as a kind of moral payback in the long term; you’re making a difference in the place where you grew up. It’s essential even if it’s frustrating. It takes a lot of mental effort and psychological pain to explain obvious things to people who don’t have the same context or outlook. If they’re not there yet, you have to give them something they understand so they have the energy to follow you. If it’s important to have a physical object, like strips of fabric, that people can touch and talk about, this can be an entry point. A physical outcome can be beneficial for everyone and doesn’t have to hinder any process. Sometimes you can produce it quickly in practical terms. You can bring a community together, create something physical, and Following something you don’t understand requires mental investment, processing power in your brain, and the willingness to pay attention. If you give them something they understand and can get excited about, you can take them on a longer journey because they trust you. They think, “Hey, this person just showed me something I’ve never seen before, and it’s really cool.” Strategy is essential because you have to find money, people to work for you, and people to understand your vision and show up. 我是住在荷蘭的第二代台裔美國 人，對我們而言去討論如何舉辦荷蘭的「當地」活動是毫無意義的。 潘
